Getting started documentation (#127)
mendersoftware/mender-mcu: README.md

* **Provide Official Support**: Ensure that the project receives the necessary attention and
  resources from Northern.tech to meet the needs of the community and enterprise users.

## Get started

> For using `mender-mcu` for the first time, we strongly recommend you start with our [Zephyr reference application](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-mcu-integration).

Reviewer: Not only that (recommend), but the rest of the doc assumes that mender-mcu-integration is being used. State this clearly and why (E.g. To simplify first-time testing, we will use ...)

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is true - or at least was not my intention.

The README here should enough to do your integration. There are examples (like the networking) that are taken from mender-mcu-integration, but it is not a hard requirement to use mender-mcu-integration to follow the instructions here.

Do you disagree @danielskinstad ?

Author: I do not disagree. Do you think my updated comment still stands based on your comment?

Reviewer 2: It's good.

* **Provide Official Support**: Ensure that the project receives the necessary attention and
  resources from Northern.tech to meet the needs of the community and enterprise users.

> ## Getting started

Reviewer 2: We should keep "Get started". We use to have "getting" in docs.mender.io and we switched it and we want to be consistent

For using `mender-mcu` for the first time, we strongly recommend you start with our [Zephyr reference application](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-mcu-integration).

The policy is that the reference application's `main` branch will follow the latest stable branch of `mender-mcu`
(this repository).

In the `mender-mcu-integration` repository you will find:
* A reference `west` workspace for Zephyr OS builds, including `CMake` and `KConfig` configurations.
* Sample application for how to use `mender-mcu` APIs.
* A list of boards that we have so far tested.

We recommend starting there to understand how we have designed our solution and then coming back
here for more in-depth information.

### Compatibility

> | Zephyr OS version | Bootloader |

Reviewer 2: I don't think the bootloader should be in this table. On the one hand, because we don't plan to integrate with any other bootloader, and in the other hand because it is an update module specific thing.

When introducing the update module (I haven't read so far, but let's assume there is a section for it) then we shall specify that "zephyr-image" update module the module installed by default that integrates with MCUboot

|-------------------|------------|
| v3.7.0            | MCUboot    |

### Boards

> The reference board for `mender-mcu` is the [ESP32-S3-DevKitC](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-dev-kits/en/latest/esp32s3/esp32-s3-devkitc-1/index.html#).

Reviewer 2: I would link to the Zephyr board page instead

To build the project, you need a board that supports MCUboot. The following link will filter
the officially supported boards that also support MCUboot:

* [Zephyr Project supported boards with MCU boot](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/gsearch.html?q=MCUboot&check_keywords=yes&area=default#gsc.tab=0&gsc.q=MCUboot&gsc.ref=more%3Aboards&gsc.sort=)

> 

Reviewer 2: This is not true. Only if you want to use our module. Otherwise you can develop your own module using the provided API.

So this I would move to the section where we introduce Update Modules.

> ### Setting up a West project with `mender-mcu` as a module

Reviewer 2: Here and in other places,

```suggestion
### Setting up a West project with `mender-mcu` as a Zephyr module
```

or

```suggestion
### Setting up a West project with `mender-mcu` as a west module
```

I would make sure to say "west module" to avoid confusion with "mender module" or "mender update module"

See the [Zephyr documentation](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/getting_started/index.html) for more information
on getting started with Zephyr.

In order to use `mender-mcu` as a [module](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/modules.html#modules-external-projects)
in a [West project](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/west/basics.html#west-workspace), you will
need to add `mender-mcu` to your project's west manifest:

```yaml
manifest:
  remotes:
  #...
    - name: mender

>       url-base: https://github.com/mendersoftware

Reviewer 2: This is not necessary if we use `url` in the module. I think it is cleaner to remove the `remotes`, as we expect only one module to be needed, but also specially here in the README for a shorter snippet.

  #...
  projects:
    - name: mender-mcu
      remote: mender
      revision: main
      path: modules/mender-mcu
      import: true
```

Then you will need to initialize a Zephyr workspace based on the manifest,
which can be done like so:
```
west init workspace --manifest-url https://url/to/repository-containing-manifest

> cd workspace && west update

Reviewer 2: As a user, assuming that I already have my hello-world project initialized, how can I add Mender MCU module and then just update?

This might be a better instruction than assuming we start from scratch. Or at least we should include both

```

### Configuring the client
Zephyr provides [tools](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/build/kconfig/menuconfig.html) for configuring
projects, which are used to set Kconfig options. These options are used by modules to configure their behavior.

The options for configuring `mender-mcu` are found in the menuconfig under `Modules -> mender-mcu`,
and are prefixed with `MENDER_`.

You can use either `west build -t menuconfig` or `west build -t guiconfig` to open
the configuration menu.

The following option **must** be set in any configuration:
* `MENDER_SERVER_TENANT_TOKEN` which is a token that identifies which tenant a device belongs to.

You change the server from the default `https://hosted.mender.io` by changing the following option:

> * `MENDER_SERVER_HOST`

Reviewer 2: Instead of just the server, I would here say something like:

The most common options to modify are the following:
* MENDER_SERVER_HOST
* intervals
* ?

* Inventory setting. There is an explicit call to set the inventory. This will update the internal
inventory of the client and sent to the Mender Server in the next inventory report.

* User Provided Keys. The client can be configured to use a provided a keypair. If set to
`NULL`, the client will auto-generate its own keypair using ECDSA.

### Update Modules API

> The Update Modules API is exposed in [mender-update-module.h](include/mender-update-module.h).

Reviewer: Update Module API

once created, all Update Modules are identified by a C struct. The most important part of
the struct is the array of callbacks, one to be called for each state.

See [the state machine workflow
diagram](https://docs.mender.io/artifact-creation/create-a-custom-update-module#the-state-machine-workflow)
to learn about the flow between each state. An Update Module does not need to implement all of them,
only the ones that are relevant for a particular type of update.

After writing the code, you need to register the Update Module into the Mender MCU. See the register
update module function in [`mender-client.h`](include/mender-client.h).

### Network

See this [example](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-mcu-integration/blob/main/src/utils/netup.c) from mender-mcu-integration for a demo.
This implementation uses Zephyr's native networking APIs, see [Zephyr's Networking Guide](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/connectivity/networking/index.html).

### Certificates
See this [example](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-mcu-integration/blob/main/src/utils/certs.c) from mender-mcu-integration for a demo.

> The `mender-mcu` client can take up to two certificates; typically one for the Server API calls, and

Reviewer: Good you document this clearly but this seems like a limit we need to increase. If certificates need rotation we need to have the building blocks. I think we at least need support for 4 (two for each).

Reviewer 2: This brings a point that we should rather move all the certs handling into mender-mcu core repo. Right now in the core we define if there will be one or two, but then is the application (mender-mcu-integration or any other user application) that will add the certs via `tls_credential_add(...)`. Instead, we can (and should?) have the mender client init function add the certs.

I suggest we create a task for this and do not modify the README further. In the task we shall write that the README needs to be updated accordingly.

Reviewer 3: I don't quite see how this is part of the `mender-mcu` (client) scope. In my eyes, this is part of the "environment", just like the network setup and other similar things.

Reviewer 2: That is a valid point (and the original point for having it out of Mender hands).

But it gets tricky for us when down in the code `zsock_setsockopt` needs to know the CA tags (up to 4).

At least we should think about how to simplify this part :thinking: We could maybe have yet another callback to get this `TLS_SEC_TAG_LIST` from the user.

To move the topic forward: discuss in next client team meeting and create a task either for moving it to mender-mcu (most likely not) or other ideas for decoupling it a bit (like mine above or others).

### Building the client

See the [building section](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-mcu-integration?tab=readme-ov-file#building-the-zephyr-project-mender-reference-app)
in mender-mcu-integration for a list of the boards that we have tested, and for examples
on how to build for them.

### Creating a Mender Artifact

NOTE: Compression of artifacts is **not** supported, which is why we use `--compression none`

After building the client, you can create a [Mender Artifact](https://docs.mender.io/overview/artifact).

The update module must correspond with one of the ones registered during initialization of the client.
The device type must match the one set at build time - if you're unsure what this is, you can
check the value of `MENDER_DEVICE_TYPE` in the menuconfig, by default it uses Zephyr's `BOARD`.

The Artifact Name is arbitrary, but should be unique.

```bash
UPDATE_MODULE=<update_module>
ARTIFACT_NAME=<artifact_name>
DEVICE_TYPE=<device_type>

mender-artifact write module-image \
  --type $UPDATE_MODULE \
  --file build/zephyr/zephyr.signed.bin \
  --artifact-name $ARTIFACT_NAME \
  --device-type $DEVICE_TYPE \
  --compression none
```
### Deployment

> After creating and uploading the artifact to the server, you should be able to deploy it to the device.

Reviewer: Would make this more confident :) "should be" doesn't instill confidence

... upload the Artifact to the Mender server and deploy it to your device.

```c
mender_client_activate();
```

### Building the client

#### ESP32-S3-DevKitC

In order to build for ESP32-S3-DevKitC, you will need an overlay file that enables WiFi

```conf
&wifi {
	status = "okay";
};
```

To build the project, you can use the following command:
```
west build -b esp32s3_devkitc/esp32s3/procpu <project-name> -- -DEXTRA_CONF_FILE=</path/to/overlay.conf>
```

You can flash the project and monitor the serial line with the following commands:
```
west flash && west espressif monitor
```

### Creating a Mender Artifact

NOTE: Compression of artifacts is **not** supported, which is why we use `--compression none`

After building the client, you can create a [Mender Artifact](https://docs.mender.io/overview/artifact).

The update module must correspond with the one registered during initialization of the client.
The device type must match the one set at build time - if you're unsure what this is, you can
check the value of `MENDER_DEVICE_TYPE` in the menuconfig.

The Artifact Name is arbitrary, but should be unique.

```bash
UPDATE_MODULE=<update_module>
ARTIFACT_NAME=<artifact_name>
DEVICE_TYPE=<device_type>

mender-artifact write module-image \

>   --type $ZEPHYR_IMAGE\

Reviewer 3: `$UPDATE_MODULE`, right?

Author: oops, yup

update module function in [`mender-client.h`](include/mender-client.h).

> 

Reviewer 2: We are missing an explicit section on zephyr-image module (see comments below)

### Network

See this [example](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-mcu-integration/blob/main/src/utils/netup.c) from mender-mcu-integration for a demo.
This implementation uses Zephyr's native networking APIs, see [Zephyr's Networking Guide](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/connectivity/networking/index.html).

The wifi ssid is set by the `MENDER_WIFI_SSID` option,
and the password is set by the `MENDER_APP_WIFI_PSK` option.

### Certificates
See this [example](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-mcu-integration/blob/main/src/utils/certs.c) from mender-mcu-integration for a demo.

> The `mender-mcu` client can take up to two certificates; if you connect to hosted Mender,
> you will need one for the server and for downloading Mender Artifacts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `mender-mcu` client can take up to two certificates; typically one for the Server API calls and for downloading Mender Artifacts from the Server storage. The latter is optional.
```

Something like that?

The certificate should be in DER format.
You will need to generate an INC file from the certificate.

> 

Reviewer 2: This is not necessarily true, you can the certs in different ways. I would be more generic and link to sample code of Zephyr project.

Author: I couldn't find any code samples from Zephyr - do you know of any?

Reviewer 2: My point was that it is not necessary to be in DER format, if you configure via Kconfig to accept PEM format.

Example of installing certs with PEM format: https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/tree/v3.7.1/samples/net/sockets/big_http_download/src

Now, DER format is more efficient, so we should not recommend PEM.

So, how could we do this generic enough here? Maybe: saying that the client expects the user to add the certificates using `tls_credential_add`. Docs at https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/doxygen/html/group__tls__credentials.html

(Also, in relation to [this other comment](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-mcu/pull/127#discussion_r1912909389), we probably will get the rid of this friction point anyway - if we move it into mender-mcu core, then we can require that the cert is already in DER format or support converting it from CMake ourselves)
